Executive Order (2017) Further information: Executive Order 13767 President Trump displaying Executive Order 13767.

Throughout his 2016 presidential campaign, Trump called for the construction of a border wall.

In January 2017, Trump signed Executive Order 13767, which formally directed the U.S. government to begin wall construction along the U.S.–Mexico border using existing federal funding.

The Trump wall, commonly referred to as "The Wall", was an expansion of the Mexico–United States barrier during the U.S. presidency of Donald Trump.

Background Fence between San Diego's border patrol offices in California (left) and Tijuana, Mexico The Mexico–United States barrier is a series of vertical barriers along the Mexico–United States border aimed at preventing illegal crossings from Mexico into the United States.

Much of the remainder consists of 30-foot-tall steel fencing where previously there had been smaller fencing to deter automobiles.

Between the physical barriers, security is provided by a "virtual fence" of sensors, cameras, and other surveillance equipment used to dispatch United States Border Patrol agents to suspected migrant crossings.

Additionally, a private organization called We Build the Wall constructed under five miles (8.0 km) of new wall on private property near El Paso, Texas, with Trump's encouragement.

After a political struggle for funding, including an appropriations lapse resulting in a government shutdown for 35 days, and the declaration of a national emergency, construction started in 2019.

Then-Mexican president Enrique Peña Nieto said that Mexico would not pay for the wall.

As of January 2009, U.S. Customs and Border Protection reported that it had more than 580 miles (930 km) of barriers in place.

He said that, if elected, he would "build the wall and make Mexico pay for it".

The U.S. built new barriers along 455 miles, 49 miles of which previously had no barrier.

Initially, On January 20, 2021, newly inaugurated U.S. president Joe Biden terminated the national emergency and halted construction of the wall,but the Secretary of Homeland Security later hinted that the construction of the wall may continue under Biden's administration.

Declaration of national emergency (2019) Main article: National Emergency Concerning the Southern Border of the United States Trump signed a declaration of national emergency on February 15, 2019.

On June 3, 2018, the San Diego section of wall construction began.

The barrier is not one contiguous structure, but a discontinuous series of physical obstructions variously classified as "fences" or "walls".

Structure Wall prototypes being presented to President Trump in San Diego, March 2018 In February 2017, Trump said "the wall is getting designed right here" but did not offer specifics.

Trump had earlier insisted he needed $5.7 billion to extend the Mexico–United States barrier.

Considerations One-time costs include land acquisition and construction of new or replacement fence; ongoing costs include maintenance of existing fence and Border Patrol agents who guard the area.

At the same time, Trump signed a declaration that the situation at the southern border constitutes a national emergency.

Trump proposed it again at Trump's June 2015 announcement speech for his 2015–2016 presidential campaign, along with a claim that Mexico would pay for it.

Soon afterwards, however, President Trump declared a National Emergency Concerning the Southern Border of the United States, which the administration claimed invalidated the restrictions imposed by Congress.

In March 2017, U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP) began accepting prototype ideas for a U.S.–Mexico border wall from companies and said it would issue a request for proposals by March 24.

On February 27, 2019, the House of Representatives voted in favor of a resolution rejecting Trump's declaration of a national emergency on the southern border.

In June 2017, Trump said his proposed border wall should be covered with solar panels as a means of making "beautiful structures" and helping pay for the wall.

The funding restrictions, and the National Emergency executive order, became the center points of the legal challenge to the appropriation of funds to construct the wall.

I will build a great wall and I'll have Mexico pay for that wall."

On February 15, 2019, Trump signed a bill to fund the government for the balance of the fiscal year, but derided the bill as inadequate because it contained only $1.375 billion for border security.

The Associated Press reported that more than two hundred organizations had expressed interest in designing and building the wall for CBP.

Such a supplemental spending bill was supported by then-House Speaker Paul Ryan.

The concept for the proposed expansion was developed by campaign advisers Sam Nunberg and Roger Stone in 2014 as a memorable talking point Trump could use to tie his business experience as a builder and developer to his immigration policy proposals.

This declaration ostensibly made available $600 million from the Treasury Forfeiture Fund, $2.5 billion from the United States Department of Defense (including anti-drug accounts), $3.6 billion from military construction accounts, for a total of $8 billion when added to the $1.375 billion allocated by Congress.

The same month, a lawsuit filed in El Paso County produced a ruling that Trump's declaration of emergency was unlawful, as it fails to meet the National Emergencies Act's definition of an emergency.

Upon taking office Trump signed an executive order to begin building the wall, but left open the question of payment.

Instead of using physical walls, this plan for a "virtual wall" would involve easily transportable "roll-up" towers with attached motion sensing and camera equipment.

While campaigning for the presidency in early 2016, Trump claimed it would be a one-time cost of only $8 billion, while Republican House Speaker Paul Ryan and Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell said $15 billion, and the Trump administration's own early estimates ranged up to $25 billion.

The proposals included placing solar panels along part of a wall; placing artwork along the wall ("a polished concrete wall augmented with stones and artifacts" related to the local region); incorporating ballistics resistance technology and sensors for above ground and below ground penetration; and the creation of a "co-nation" where the border is maintained by both countries in an open status.

Trump's FY 2018 Budget Blueprint increases discretionary funds for the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) by $2.8 billion (to $44.1 billion).

By May 2019, 1.7 miles (2.7 km) of barrier had been constructed from the appropriation.

Funding plans and actions Campaign promise (2016) Further information: Donald Trump 2016 presidential campaign Throughout his 2015–2016 presidential campaign, Donald Trump called for construction of a large fortified border wall, claiming that if elected he would "build the wall and make Mexico pay for it".

On October 26, a two-mile stretch of steel bollards in Calexico, California, was commemorated as the first section of Trump's wall, although media coverage heavily debated whether it should be considered a "wall" or a "fence".

Research at Texas A&M University and Texas Tech University indicated that the wall, and border walls in general, are unlikely to be effective at reducing illegal immigration or movement of contraband.

In July, Trump said the wall should be transparent to detect smugglers who "throw the large sacks of drugs over".

The Department of Homeland Security's internal estimate in early 2017, shortly after Trump took office, was that his proposed border wall would cost $21.6 billion and take 3.5 years to build.

While initially small and mobile, when deployed the internal structure of the tower telescopes upwards to create a tall surveillance apparatus.

Funding restrictions (2019) In February 2019, Congress amended an existing appropriations bill, adding language that specifically prohibits new funding from being used to build border barriers at several sites, including the Santa Ana National Wildlife Refuge, the Bentsen-Rio Grande Valley State Park, the La Lomita Historical park, the National Butterfly Center, and the area "within or east of" the Vista del Mar Ranch tract of the Lower Rio Grande Valley National Wildlife Refuge.

The U.S. Customs and Border Protection agency has frequently called for more physical barriers, citing their efficacy.

The DHS Secretary John F. Kelly told the Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee during a hearing the Budget Blueprint "includes $2.6 billion for high-priority border security technology and tactical infrastructure, including funding to plan, design and construct the border wall".

Build the Wall Act introduced (2018) Further information: Build the Wall, Enforce the Law Act of 2018 A January 2018 Trump administration proposal for the U.S. Customs and Border Protection called for $18 billion in funding for the wall over the following ten years.

Along remote parts of the border, this method could be cheaper and more practical than building permanent structures on location.

The total length of the continental border is 1,954 miles (3,145 km).

A manufacturing company based in Pine City, Minnesota, was awarded a bid to help build the "virtual wall" along the border in 2018.

Others, including John Griese, co-owner of the solar installation firm Elemental Energy, estimated a profit of over $100 million per year from such panels.

Cost estimates Early estimates In 2013, a Bloomberg Government analysis estimated that it would cost up to $28 billion annually to seal the border.

Trump requested that the wall be painted black, despite the protests of military leaders and border officials, who call it unnecessary.

Trump had planned to meet Peña Nieto at the White House on January 27, 2017, to discuss topics including border security and possible negotiations around the wall.

On January 25, 2017, the Trump administration signed Executive Order 13767, which formally directed the government to begin attempting to construct a border wall using existing federal funding, although actual construction of a wall did not begin at this time due to the large expense and lack of clarity on how it would be paid for.

In March 2017, the Trump administration submitted an amendment for fiscal year 2017 that includes a $3 billion continuing budget for "border security and immigration enforcement".

In September 2017, the U.S. government announced the start of construction of eight prototype barriers made from concrete and other materials.

In October 2020, the DHS published data indicating that the new border barrier has been effective at reducing the number of illegal border entries.

On January 4, 2019, Trump claimed that former presidents had privately told him they should have built a border wall, but every living former U.S. president denied this.

The Mexican government has rejected Trump's statements and has rejected the idea of Mexico funding construction of a wall.

The next day, Trump vetoed the bill.

While on the campaign trail in February 2016, Trump claimed the cost to be just $8 billion for the wall.

Carla Provost, the chief of U.S. border patrol, stated "We already have many miles, over 600 miles (970 km) of barrier along the border.

Eric Boehm of Reason magazine disputed this claim, saying the study massively underestimated the actual cost of building and maintaining the wall.

The Trump administration suggested that wall construction could be funded by a twenty percent tariff on Mexico imports, a proposal which immediately encountered objections from members of Congress of both parties.

On January 25, 2019, Trump agreed to endorse a stopgap bill to reopen the government, saying it was to allow for negotiations to take place to approve an appropriations bill both parties could agree on.

In response, Peña Nieto gave a national televised address saying Mexico would not pay for the wall, and cancelled his meeting with Trump.

In September, the House and Senate again voted in favor of ending the declaration of emergency, and in October the president again vetoed it.

Trump has repeated the claim many times.

Also, new dirt roads that had been used to access the wall construction served as new access roads for smugglers.

Outcome As of December 2020, the total funding given for new fencing was about $15 billion, a third of which had been given by Congress while Trump had ordered the rest taken from the military budget.

"I started in the San Diego sector in 1992 and it didn't matter how many agents we lined up," said Chief Patrol Agent Rodney Scott.